

                        PROGRAM RCE MOD 20
           LEAST-SQUARES FITTING OF ATOMIC ENERGY LEVELS


                         Robert D. Cowan
                 Los Alamos National Laboratory
                          February 1978
        (revised August l986, January 1991, and August 1993)


CONTENTS
    I.  Introduction                                          2
   II.  Source Programs                                       2
  III.  Input (TAPE2E)                                        3
   IV.  Input (INE20)                                         4
    V.  Dimensions                                            8
   VI.  Running RCG and RCE (single parity)                   8
  VII.  Output                                                8
 VIII.  Running RCN, RCN2, RCG, and RCE (single parity)       9
   IX.  Formats for ELEMID and CONFIG                        10
    X.  Units                                                10
   XI.  Rerunning RCE or RCG (output file PARVALS)           11
  XII.  Running both parities together                       11
 XIII.  RCE output files LEVELS1, LEVELS2, and LEVELS3       12
  XIV.  Notes regarding convergence problems                 13
   XV.  Notes regarding Tables I and II                      15






I. Introduction
        RCE is a FORTRAN 77 program for CRAY-1 or CYBER 205 or 
similar computers.  Similarly to RCN, RCN2, and RCG, it has been 
adapted to run also on VAXs, SUNs, IBM RISCs, and Macintosh 
Centris computers, and should be easily adaptable also to Apollos, 
Hewlett-Packards, PCs, etc.
        The basic purpose of RCE is to adjust the values of various 
theoretical parameters so as to produce computed atomic energy 
levels in the best possible (least-squares-wise) agreement with 
experimentally known level values.  Levels whose energies are not 
known experimentally can be omitted from consideration.  Any of 
the parameters can be held fixed at specified values, or groups of 
parameters can be forced to vary in such a way that the ratios of 
the values within a group remain fixed relative to each other.
        The fitting process is carried out by an automatic iterative 
procedure until the parameter values no longer change from one 
iteration cycle to the next (by more than 0.03), or for a 
specified maximum number of cycles.  The iteration can be carried 
out in any one of the seven angular-momentum coupling schemes 
available in program RCG; final eigenvectors are printed in this 
representation, and also in either the LS or JJ representation 
(see Sec. VII).
        The basic theory involved is discussed in R. D. Cowan, The 
Theory of Atomic Structure and Spectra (University of California 
Press, Berkeley, 1981), especially Sections 16-3 to 16-5, 
hereinafter referred to as TASS.


II. Source Programs
        The program assumes that the coefficient matrices for each 
value of J and for each parameter are contained in a binary input 
file TAPE2E, precomputed by program RCG.  The experimental levels 
(term values) T, together with (optional) estimated parameter 
values and various control information must be provided as a BCD 
input file INE20 (read internally as unit 10); this file can, 
except for the experimental level values, be obtained in basic 
form as output from RCG (a file named OUTGINE--short for 
OUTrcgINrce).
        The following brief discussion of the function of each 
subroutine provides a rough outline of the basic calculational 
procedure.
        MAIN  Handles all input (including, for each J, transfer of 
the [LS-JJ or other] transformation matrix from TAPE2 to TAPE5, 
and transfer of coefficient matrices from TAPE2 to TAPE4).  It 
also handles the iteration control and most output.
        EIGEN  Called by MAIN.  Reads coefficient matrices from 
TAPE4, calculates the energy matrix (for each J) for current 
values of the parameters, and calls subroutine TRED2 to 
diagonalize the energy matrix and thereby obtain computed energy 
levels
        ORDER  Called by EIGEN (and also by MAIN) to arrange the 
computed eigenvalues and vectors in the order of largest 
eigenvector component (i.e., so as to make the eigenvector matrix 
such that the eigenvector components of largest magnitude tend to 
lie on the diagonal); vectors not having clearly dominant 
components are arranged so that the corresponding eigenvalues lie 
in the same numerical order as do the remaining energy levels.  [A 
test number CRIT can be chosen to be zero, so that no vector will 
be considered to have a dominant component.  Then all eigenvalues 
will be correlated with experimental level values in numerical 
order.]
        CALCX  Called by MAIN to modify the parameter values X so as 
to improve the agreement between eigenvalues (W) and energy levels (T).
        LSS  Linear system solver called by CALCX.
        TRED2/TQL2  Suite of matrix-diagonalization programs.
        WR  Program to compact a two-dimensional array (dimensions 
IA x IA) containing a matrix of size IM (IM.LE.IA) into a one-
dimensional array of size IM*IM or IM*(IM+1)/2.
        RD  Program to accomplish the inverse of WR.
        CLOCK  Program to obtain CPU time in minutes (for 
information only).  This program contains sections appropriate for 
a CRAY, VAX or Macintosh, SUN, or IBM RISC; a section appropriate 
to another type of computer can be added, or the output time 
simply set to zero.
        OUT8  Writes on TAPE8 (external file name LEVELS1) a summary 
of the final results: experimental level, eigenvalue, Lande g-
value, dominant configuration, and the percentage composition of 
the level (three largest components if an input constant CRIT1 is 
zero, or a unique component plus the two largest remaining 
components if CRIT1 is greater than zero) in each of two coupling 
representations.  Levels are arranged in the order of increasing J 
value, and for given J in order of increasing energy.
        SORT8TO7 and SORT  Sort the information on TAPE8 in the 
order of increasing eigenvalues, and write it on the OUTPUT file 
and on a file TAPE7 (external file name LEVELS2).  Also, sort the 
information on TAPE7 in the order of dominant configuration, and 
write it on a file TAPE12 (external file name LEVELS3).
        SORT2/ORDERI  Sort numbers in one table in numerically 
increasing order, and similarly rearrange numbers in other tables.


III. Input (TAPE2E)
        Details of the TAPE2E binary file will not be given here, 
but can be deduced from subroutine RCEINP of program RCG, where 
this file is written, or from RCE MAIN, where the file is read.  
Briefly, this file contains (for each of one or more "CSETS"
--i. e., for each of one or more sets of electron configurations 
of interest):
        (1)  A record including a serial number for the CSET, the 
number of values of J, the total number of parameters, the number 
of configurations, and the number of parameters for each 
configuration and for each pair of interacting configurations.
   For  each J-value:
       (2)  The value of J, the matrix size, the transformation 
matrix from the primary to the secondary coupling representation, 
the serial number of the configuration for each matrix row, and 
brief basis-state labels in both of the representations.
        (3)  The energy-coefficient matrix for each parameter, and 
the Lande g-value matrix, all in the primary representation.


IV. Input (INE20)
        The input file INE20 (internally read as unit 10) must 
contain the following information.  [Input items (2) through (10) 
may be repeated as many times as desired.]
		
        (1)  NOCYPR, NOCYCR, NOCYCE, I216, IW6      (Format 5I5).

        The least-squares iteration will proceed for at most NOCYCE 
cycles, output being printed every NOCYPR cycles, with input 
levels being reordered (into the same numerical order as the 
computed eigenvalues) every NOCYCR cycles.  [If NOCYCR ň NOCYCE, 
this reordering will never take place].  If I216 = 2 (normal value 
is I216=0 or blank), then I216 is set to 16.  If IW6 < 0, then 
abbreviated output will be sent to the monitor screen to show the 
real-time progress of the RCE calculation.  (If the input file 
INE20 is prepared by using the output file OUTGINE of an RCG run, 
then the value of IW6 will be the same as that in columns 73-74 of 
the RCG control card; if this control card has not been changed 
from that prepared by RCN2 in the file OUT2ING, then IW6 will be 
the same as the value in columns 71-75 of the RCN control card.)

        (2)  NCDES, IDENOM, IPRNV, IPRNA, WMAX, IPRNX, IPRNSQ, S  
                    (Format 4I5, F10.5, 2I5, F10.5).

            (a)  If NCDES < 0, this was originally a signal to exit 
from RCE.  Now this card is simply ignored, and exit is 
accomplished instead by an EOF test.
            (b)  If NCDES = 0, use CSET (on files 4 and 5) obtained 
from file 2 on the preceding least-squares calculation.  Also, if 
IDENOM < 0, set IDENOM=0; if IDENOM=0, use previous values of IDENOM 
and DENOM; if IDENOM > 0, read new set of DENOM [item (3) below].
            (c)  If NCDES > 0, find desired CSET (serial number 
NOCSET = NCDES) from file 2 and transfer to files 4 and 5.
            (d)  If IPRNV.NE.0, do not print D, V, B matrices [vkl = 
ëwk/ëXl; B = VV; D = V*(T-W);  equation to be solved is B*(DX) = D;  
see TASS, reference above].
            (e)  If IPRNA.NE.0, do not print A (energy) matrices.
            (f)  If IPRNX.NE.0, do not print new parameter values 
between calls of CALCX and EIGEN.
            (g)  Do not print results for levels with eigenvalue 
greater than WMAX.  (If zero is read in, WMAX is set to 1010).
            (h)  If IPRNSQ = 0, do not print the squares of the 
eigenvector components.
            (i)  The scale factor S affects only results on files 
LEVELS1, LEVELS2, and LEVELS3 [Sec. XIII].

        [At this point, one record of tape 2 is read to provide MMAX 
= number of matrices (J values), LMAX = number of parameters, and 
NMAX = number of configurations].
		
        (3)  If on card (2) NCDES=0 and IDENOM > 0, or if NCDES > 0 
and IDENOM.NE.0, then
            Read (DENOM(L), L=1,LMAX),    (Format 7F10.5).
        These are denominators to convert from Fk to Fk , etc; the 
latter are printed (if IDENOM.NE.0) after the least-squares iteration 
has been completed.  [In practice this option is seldom used, so 
that IDENOM is made zero on card (2), and the card(s) (3) 
omitted.]

        (4)  One or more cards containing element identification and 
configuration name for each of the configurations:
            Read  ELIDEN, (CONFIG(I), I=1,NMAX)  [Format 7(A8,2X)].

        (5)  Read (XIDEN(L),  L=1,LMAX)  
These are parameter names [the format is 7(A6,A4)--i.e., A6,A4 for 
each parameter, seven parameters per card].

        (6)  For each J-matrix (of size IM, read earlier from 
TAPE2):
             (6a)  Read experimental level values (term values)
                      (T(M),  M=1,IM)      (Format 7F10.5)
             (6b)  Read level flags
                      (NF(M),  M=1,IM)     (Format 7I10)
The order of the term values may be in increasing numerical value, 
or may be such that their nominal designations are arranged in the 
same order as the matrix basis-state labels in program RCG for the 
primary representation being used in RCE [see under item (10) 
below].  The value of NF(M)=M if the Mth level is to be included 
in the least-squares fit, or NF(M)=-M if it is to be excluded.  If 
in item (6a) the last value of M on a full card is less than the 
matrix size IM, and a positive number TEMP (format F10.5) is 
punched in columns 71-80, then no more values of T (nor NF) will 
be read for this J; instead, the value TEMP will be used for all 
remaining term values of this J, and the corresponding values of 
NF(M) will be set to -M.  [Actually, all term values are first 
read into an array W(M), and then these are moved to the T(M) 
array via T(M) = W(|NF(M)|), so that using values of |NF(M)| other 
than M provides a means of rearranging the term values that is 
easier than retyping the term values in a revised order, if such 
should prove to be necessary].

        (7)  Read parameter flags
                (LF(L), L=1,LMAX)       (Format 7I10)
If |LF(L)| = 100, the Lth parameter is held fixed.  If LF(L) < -50, 
the value of the Lth parameter is allowed to go negative 
(physically permissible only for the configuration-interaction 
parameters Rk, or for effective-operator parameters such as  a, á, 
g).  In least-squares mode minus one (LSQM=-1), parameters to be 
linked together (ratios of their values held fixed) are to be 
given equal negative values of LF between -1 and -98 inclusive.  
Successive values -1 or -51, -2 or -52, -3 or -53, ... must be 
used (though not necessarily in that order) if RCE is to correctly 
compute the effective total number of free parameters.  [The value 
-99 can be used for a negative parameter not linked to others.  
After the code has determined those parameters that are to be 
allowed to go negative (-51.GE.LF.GE.-99), it changes each -99 to 0, 
adds 50 to all values -51.GE.LF.GE.-98 (see the appended notes to 
Tables I and II), and takes the number of parameters with LF=0 
minus the most negative value of LF from -1 to -50 as the total 
number of free parameters.] 

        (8)  Read     (XMAX(L), L=1,LMAX)      (Format 7F10.5)
The value of parameter X(L) is restricted to the range 0 to XMAX 
[for LF(L) = -50], or to the range -XMAX to +XMAX [for LF(L) < -50];  
if XMAX=0 is read, a default value of 1010 is used.

        (9)  Read initial estimates of the parameter values
                     (X(L), L=1,LMAX)         (Format 7F10.5)

        (10)  A control card containing the following:

       Variable        Format             Normal Value 
       --------        ------      ------------------------      
                                   X(L) <> 0       X(L) = 0
                                 -----------     -----------
          F0            F10.5        1.0             0.2
          FM            F10.0        0.0             0.0
          F1            F10.5       -1.0            -1.0
         DELF           F5.3         0.0             0.2
        NOFMAX          I5          1000            2 or 3
         GCOE           F10.3        1.0             0.8
         DXMAX          E10.3       10.0          1.0 to 5.0
         CRIT1          F5.3         0.3             0.3
         CRIT           F5.3     0 (or 0.85)      0 (or 0.85)
         CRIT2          F2.0        -1.0            -1.0

The significance of the control-card quantities is the following 
(except see Sec. XIII regarding CRIT1):
        If all of the initial parameter estimates X(L) are zero 
(except for those held fixed by specifying |LF(L)| = 100), then the 
iteration is started by setting the eigenvectors equal 
approximately to the basis vectors (1000...), (0100...), etc.  
(See TASS, page 470).  To give energy matrices with eigenvectors 
that initially are approximately basis vectors, the off-diagonal 
matrix elements are multiplied by a fudge factor F, which is 
initially small (F = F0) but is gradually increased to its proper 
value of unity, with NOFMAX cycles being run at each value of F.  
The value of F is increased in the following manner:  Starting 
with F = F0, then F is multiplied successively by a factor FM until 
F.GE.F1, then increased by an additive amount DELF until F.GE.1, at 
which point F is set to unity and NOFMAX to 1000.  (As indicated 
by the suggested value of F1=-1 in the table above, the multiplier 
stage can usually be omitted).
        Normally, a calculation will be started using non-zero 
estimates of the parameters X(L) from an RCG run, and the 
calculation will be begun using F0=1.
        In either case, the code attempts to increase the speed of 
convergence by letting the parameter values change by a factor G 
times the predicted changes.  Initially G=1, but its value is 
automatically recomputed each cycle (G < 1 if the convergence is 
oscillatory, G > 1 if it is monotonic).  The degree by which G is 
allowed to depart from unity is proportional to GCOE, but G is 
always kept small enough that no X(L) is allowed to change on any 
one iteration cycle by more than 2*DXMAX.  [The units of X and 
DXMAX are the same as those of the input term values T(M);  the 
values of DXMAX listed in the table assume units of 1000 cm-1.]
	On each iteration cycle, the computed eigenvalues are 
arranged in the order of the dominant component of the 
corresponding eigenvectors--a dominant component cd being one such 
that
               (ci)**2 < CRIT*(cd)**2
for all components i.NE.d.  Eigenvalues for which the vectors have no 
dominant component are arranged in the same order as the 
"unassigned" term values.  [It is therefore necessary that unknown 
term values, deleted from the least-squares fit via negative 
values of NF, nevertheless be given values of appropriate 
magnitude as best they can be estimated.]  Alternatively, CRIT can 
be set to zero, NOCYCR made equal to or greater than NOCYCE, and 
all input term values (including estimated values for unknown 
levels) arranged in increasing numerical order; then all 
eigenvalues will likewise be arranged in numerical order (the same 
as in RCG) in all iteration cycles.
        If a linked-parameter calculation has been made (LSQM=-1, 
defined by reading in two or more equal values of LF(L) lying in 
the range -51 to -98), then a second calculation with all 
parameters independently free will automatically be made (LSQM=0) 
unless CRIT2 < +1.
        The rather complicated changes that the code makes in values 
of XMAX, XMIN, and LF at various stages of the calculation are 
given in Tables I and II.  [Ignore the case LSQM= +1, which is not 
included in RCE Mod 20.]


V. Dimensions
        The present version of RCE has been compiled with array 
dimensions that limit it to use on problems involving at most 20 
configurations, 280 parameters, and 12 matrices (J-values), each 
no bigger than 75 x 75 in size; the total number of levels of all J 
must be no greater than 4*75=300.  The dimensions can be readily 
increased via the parameter-statement variables IC, IB, IX, IA, 
and IV, respectively.  These dimensions and the array sizes 
actually required for the current run are printed near the 
beginning of the output file; if any one of the array sizes 
exceeds the corresponding dimension, the program will 
automatically stop.  (It is possible that the program may bomb on 
an exceeded dimension before the printout occurs.)


VI. Running RCG and RCE (single parity)
        The program RCG must be run in order to produce the RCE 
binary input file TAPE2E.  The procedure will be illustrated by 
supposing we are going to want to make a least-squares fit of 
levels of Cu XIV 3s 3p5 + 3s2 3p3 3d.  The RCG input file shown in 
the upper portion of Table III can be easily constructed by hand.  
[The value -1 for NOCSET has been assumed.]
        Execution of RCG produces not only TAPE2E, but also a file 
named OUTGINE (written internally as TAPE11) shown in the bottom 
portion of Table III.  This file may if desired be used as a 
template for constructing the RCE input file.  It is necessary to 
replace the zero values of T(M) by the known experimental values, 
and to make NF(M) negative for unknown levels; also, to insert 
estimated values of X(L) if desired, together with any appropriate 
non-zero values of LF(L), to insert identifying names for the 
element and configurations (of which only the first fifteen will 
appear on the printed output file OUTE20), and to make any other 
desired changes (in NOCYCR, IW6, XIDEN, XMAX, etc).
        In inserting the values of T(M), these should (for each 
value of J) be arranged in numerically increasing order (assuming 
CRIT=0.0).  Alternatively, they can be arranged with their 
designations in the order of the basis states given in the 
quantum-number-listing portion of the RCG output (for the primary 
representation being used in RCE), provided CRIT is changed to 
about 0.85 and NOCYCR made equal to or less than NOCYCE, as one 
judges to be appropriate (depending on the confidence one has in 
the empirical-analysis level designations)--see the discussion 
regarding CRIT near the end of Section IV.


VII. Output
        The representation in which RCE will carry out the least-
squares fitting process is determined by the information on the 
RCG control card.
        If, as on the first card in the upper portion of Table III, 
KCPL (column 5) is one and NLSMAX (columns 23-25) is zero, then 
the coefficient matrices that RCG writes on TAPE2 will be in the 
LS representation, and RCE will therefore use LS as its primary 
representation; eigenvectors will be printed each iteration cycle 
on the output file OUTE20 in the LS representation, and on the 
final cycle will be printed also in the secondary representation, 
JJ.
        If KCPL=2 and NLSMAX=0, then in RCE the primary 
representation will be JJ and the secondary will be LS.
        If NLSMAX > 0 and if the KCPLD(I), 3.LE.I.LE.7, in columns 
33-37 are non-zero for all but one of these values, say I=M, then 
RCG will write coefficient matrices on TAPE2E in representation M; 
the primary representation in RCE will be M and the secondary 
representation will be LS or JJ according as KCPL is 1 or 2, 
respectively.
        [Obviously the transformation matrix mentioned under item 
III(2) above is the LS-JJ, JJ-LS, M-LS, or M-JJ matrix in the 
above four respective cases.]
        On the final RCE iteration cycle there are printed not only 
eigenvectors, but if IPRNSQ=0 then also "vectors" consisting of 
the squares of the eigenvector components (for each of the two 
representations).
        Along with each vector there is also printed (in a 
horizontal format) not only the corresponding eigenvalue W and 
experimental term value T (appended with an asterisk if omitted 
from the fitting process), but also T-W, the Lande g-value G, and 
a quantity GKK.  This last quantity is the diagonal element of the 
Lande g-matrix, and hence would be the g-value if the coupling 
were pure in the representation in question.  [In all cases, the 
values of GKK are printed in the order of the basis states for the 
representation in question, and will be roughly equal to the 
intermediate-coupling g-value G in the same output line only if 
the eigenvectors have been sorted in the order of dominant 
component (via CRIT=~0.85 rather than zero) and if the eigenvectors 
are fairly close to pure basis vectors.]


VIII. Running RCN, RCN2, RCG, and RCE (single parity)
        An input file for RCE containing appropriate starting 
estimates for the parameters X(L) can be obtained by running RCG 
using as input an output file from RCN2 rather than one 
constructed by hand.
        Appropriate input files for RCN and RCN2 are shown in the 
upper two sections of Table IV.  Note that on the G5INP input card 
for RCN2, a non-zero value (namely 1) has been used for NOCSET in 
column 10, and an estimated value of Eav (=450 kK) for the first 
configuration (3s 3p5) has been used for EAV11 in columns 14-20.
        Inclusion of the non-zero value of NOCSET causes RCN2 to 
include a negative number (-|NOCSET|, = -1 in this case) in columns 
9-10 of the first card of the TAPE11 output file, and also a 
"-55555555." card before the  "-99999999." card.  This file is 
ready to be used with little or no change as input to RCG.  
[Values of NLSMAX and KCPLD can be set on the RCN2 control card 
for automatic carry-through to the RCG control card, but a value 
KCPL=2 can be obtained only by hand alteration after RCN2 has been 
executed.]
        The output file OUTGINE from RCG is the same as that in 
Table III, except that labels are now obtained for the element and 
configurations, the eigenvalues computed by RCG appear for both 
the initial theoretical values W and for the term values T, and 
the (scaled HF) parameters used in computing said eigenvalues 
appear as the starting parameter values X(L).
        If this file were used unchanged as input to RCE, 
convergence should of course be obtained more-or-less immediately, 
with essentially no change in the parameter values. 
        Normally, of course, one will make changes in the same way 
as described in Section VI, except that there is now no need to 
insert element and configuration names nor estimates for the 
parameters X(L).


IX. Formats for ELEMID and CONFIG
        When an input file for RCE is to be produced by an 
RCN/RCN2/RCG run as just described, some care should be exercised 
in the typing of the RCN input cards: the element and spectrum 
identification (e.g., CuXIV in the Sec. VIII example) should be 
restricted to columns 11-16 of the RCN input card, and the 
configuration identification should be limited to columns 17-24.  
This will ensure that the element and configuration 
identifications in both RCG and RCE will turn out satisfactorily.  
If RCE output (Sec. XIII) is to be used as input to program 
INTENSITY [a special-purpose program not of general interest], 
then the configuration identifications should be right-adjusted in 
columns 17-22, because only the information in columns 20-22 will 
be included in the INTENSITY output files. 


X. Units
        When starting estimates of the parameter values X(L) are 
obtained as described in Section VIII, the units of the X(L) 
produced by RCN2/RCG are normally kK (thousands of cm-1).  Thus 
one either has to insert the experimental term values in these 
same units, or (via an editor) he has to convert the X(L) to the 
units he uses for the term values.  Alternatively, he can add a 
rescaling card (see RCG writeup, page 36) at the front of the RCG 
input file.  To obtain the X(L) in cm-1, for example, this card 
would contain blanks in columns 1-6 except a zero in column 5, and 
1.0 in columns 51-60.  [However, if values of X(L) written to the 
RCE output file PARVALS are used as input back into RCG, in the 
manner described below, the units printed on the RCG output file 
("PARAMETER VALUES IN xxxx CM-1"), together with oscillator 
strengths and transition probabilities, will be incorrect if 
anything other than kK was used throughout.]



XI. Rerunning RCE or RCG (output file PARVALS)
        Because of setup errors of one sort or another, RCE may fail 
to converge properly, and it may have to be rerun with altered 
control variables (or simply for additional iteration cycles).  To 
facilitate setting up starting parameter values for the rerun, RCE 
writes on an output file PARVALS (internally called TAPE11) the 
parameter values for each cycle; values from the desired cycle can 
be copied into the RCE input file to replace the starting values 
used on the previous RCE run.
        When final least-squares parameter values have been 
obtained, one may wish to make an RCG run to compute oscillator 
strengths and transition probabilities.  To facilitate this, the 
final parameter values are added to the end of the RCE PARVALS 
output file in the format required for RCG input, so that these 
can be edited into an RCG input file in place of the previously 
used values.  An example of this PARVALS file is given in Table 
VIII.


XII. Running both parities together
        The examples of Sections VI-VIII were for only a single 
parity.  However, it is permissible to run RCG/RCE or 
RCN/RCN2/RCG/RCE for both parities together.  An example for
           Si III  3s2 + 3p2 + 3s 3d - 3s 3p + 3p 3d
is shown in Tables V and VI.  On the G5INP control card of the 
RCN2 input file in Table V, an estimated value EAV11=4.0 has been 
used in order to allow for downward perturbation of the 3s2 
configuration by 3p2 and 3s3d.  (As the result E(3s2 1S) = -1.8308 
of the RCG run in Table VI shows, a better estimate would have 
been EAV11 =~ 6.0.)  Also on the G5INP card, NLSMAX has been set to 
250, and all KCPLD(I) for I > 3 have been made non-zero, so that the 
primary representation in RCE will be JK; see Sec. VII.  (This is 
for illustrative purposes only, as the secondary representation LS 
is much closer to the physical coupling conditions.)
        In Table VII the OUTGINE output file from RCG (Table VI) has 
been modified by hand in that the RCG eigenvalues have been 
replaced by the corresponding experimental energy levels.  In 
lines 2 and 23, the scale factor S has been changed from 1 to 1000 
so as to give energies in cm-1 in output files LEVELS1, LEVELS2, 
and LEVELS3.  Also, in line 15 of the file, the value LF(9) = -52 
has been changed to -51 so as to force the two configuration- 
interaction parameter values to retain a fixed ratio; this has 
been done in order to fit the ten even-parity levels with only 
eight parameters instead of nine and make convergence more stable.
        [In the odd-parity half of the OUTGINE file, the LF values 
for the two CI parameters are both equal to -51 already in Table 
VI.  This is the result of the way RCG has been coded:  RCG sets 
LF = -51 for all CI parameters involving configuration number one;  
LF = -52 for all interactions of configuration 2 with configurations 
3, 4, 5, ...; etc.  This arbitrary scheme has been employed in 
order to keep the total number of parameters from becoming much 
greater than the total number of levels when there are many 
interacting configurations, but it can of course be altered by 
hand.]
        The file in Table VII can be divided in half following the 
first card containing "-1" in columns 4-5, and RCE run separately 
for the two parities.  However, the file can (as in the present 
example) be used intact to make a single RCE run for both 
parities, one after the other.  [Note that the "-1" card in the 
middle of the input file, formerly the NCDES < 0 exit card (see Sec. 
IV(2)(a) on page 4), need not be removed.]  The resulting RCE 
output file PARVALS (see Sec. XI) is shown in Table VIII.


XIII. RCE output files LEVELS1, LEVELS2, and LEVELS3
        As noted at the end of Section II, RCE produces output files 
LEVELS1 and LEVELS2 (internally, TAPE8 and TAPE7), shown for the 
Si III example in Tables IX and X; also an output file LEVELS3 
(internal name TAPE12), which is not shown.  The energy units for 
T, W, and T-W are the same as in the output file OUTE20, except 
multiplied by the scale factor S read from the input card IV(2);  
thus, with units of kK used in the main body of the code, units of 
cm-1 have been obtained here as the result of setting S=1000 (see 
Sec. XII above).
        For each level, the percentage composition is listed for the 
three largest eigenvector components (first in the primary 
representation JK, and then in the secondary representation LS), 
provided CRIT1 = 0.0.  (If CRIT1 is greater than zero, the program 
chooses the first component so that no two levels have a first 
component belonging to the same basis state; in cases of strong 
basis-state mixing, the first component for some levels may be 
rather small.  The remaining two printed components for a given 
level are then the two largest ones other than the first printed 
component.)  Also listed is the dominant electron configuration, 
determined by summing over all basis states of each configuration;  
note that this dominant configuration is not necessarily the same 
as the configuration to which the leading eigenvector component 
belongs.
        Unfortunately, the quantum-number designations for the three 
eigenvector components are frequently incomplete, except in the 
case of two-subshell configurations in the LS representation.  
Complete basis-state designations for the LS and JJ representa-
tions can be obtained from the quantum-number-listing section of 
the RCG output file; for other representations, they can only be 
inferred from the coding details in RCG subroutine CPL37.  
Correlation of complete basis-state designations with the 
eigenvector-component labels in the LEVELS1-LEVELS3 files can, in 
ambiguous cases, be obtained only by working back via the 
eigenvalues to the complete eigenvector printout in the main RCE 
output file OUTE20.
        It should be noted that the LEVELS1-LEVELS3 output 
corresponds to the final cycle of the RCE run.  If, through some 
quirk of instability in the RCE iteration, the final cycle is no 
good and one wishes results for an earlier cycle, one can make an 
RCE rerun with NOCYCE=0, using input parameters obtained from the 
appropriate section of the PARVALS file.  This will likewise 
provide (on the new PARVALS file) the proper set of parameter 
values for making an RCG rerun (Sec. XI).


XIV. Notes regarding convergence problems
        Obtaining satisfactory convergence of the least-squares 
level fitting can be a tricky business requiring several reruns, 
especially when several interacting configurations are present.  
Suggested items to watch out for are the following:
        (1)  The number of free parameters (counting each set of 
linked parameters as one, and excluding parameters held fixed via 
|LF(L)| = 100) must of course be no greater than the number of 
levels being fit (not counting levels for which NF < 0); in complex 
multi-configuration cases, the former number should preferably be 
considerably less than the latter.
        (2)  When coupling conditions are close to pure LS coupling, 
the number of free Coulomb parameters (including Eav) should be no 
greater than the number of LS terms having levels included in the 
fit.
        (3)  If the number of parameters needs to be reduced in 
order to keep the iteration from wandering aimlessly, the prime 
candidates for parameters to be held fixed or linked to other 
parameters are those showing large values of the standard 
deviation SDX on the OUTE20 file.  These are likely to be spin-
orbit parameters for excited electrons (especially of large l), or 
CI parameters that produce only minor perturbations.
             (3a)  In configurations like 2p3p or 3d4d, only the sum 
of the two spin-orbit parameters zi is well determined, and it is 
usually necessary to fix the z for the outer electron or to link 
the two z's together.
             (3b)  In configurations ln where levels are known for 
only one LS term, or configurations lnl2 where levels based on 
only one ln parent are known, then all Fk(ll) must be held fixed, 
or all Fk(ll) linked together and Eav held fixed.  [This is just a 
special case, for each configuration or for each parent, of item 
(2) above.]  Violation of such requirements will usually lead to 
very wild parameter-value changes and huge values of SDX!
        (4)  In some cases, one may wish to include a configuration 
for which no levels are known experimentally--because, for 
example, this configuration is suspected of significantly 
perturbing known levels.  One approach is to include the RCG 
theoretical levels in the fit, as though they were experimental 
ones, and leave the associated parameter values free (to 
compensate for shifts in eigenvalues of other configurations, 
which then result in changes in CI effects on the configuration in 
question).  However, probably a better approach is to delete the 
unknown levels from the fit, and to hold fixed at their 
theoretical values all parameters that involve the unknown 
configuration.  In either case, it is of course important that one 
properly correct for any systematic (Eav) error in the unknown 
configuration, as indicated by similar errors (for known 
configurations) in the RCG calculation that provided the starting 
values of the X(L).  Otherwise, computed CI perturbations will be 
inaccurate, and perhaps even in the wrong direction.  The 
situation is even worse when some, but not all, levels are known.  
If the theoretical values for the unknown levels are not properly 
corrected, then they may (for example) lie below known levels of 
other configurations when they should lie above.  RCE will then 
probably make incorrect correlations of computed eigenvalues with 
input term values, throwing off the path of the parameter-value 
iteration, even though the unknown levels have nominally been 
omitted from the fitting process;  this is particularly likely to 
happen if correlation is done solely by numerical order of term 
value and eigenvalue (CRIT = 0.0) rather than by dominant 
eigenvector component (CRIT @ 0.85).
        (5)  As noted in Sec. XII, RCG initially links together the 
various CI parameters in groups as follows: all parameters 
involving configuration 1 are in the first group (LF = -51), all 
remaining parameters involving configuration 2 are in the second 
group (LF = -52), all remaining parameters involving configuration 3 
are in the third group (LF = -53), etc.  On early RCE runs in 
complicated cases it is probably best to link all CI parameters 
into a single group.  On later runs one may then experiment with 
combinations of greater flexibility involving more than one group.





















                     Notes regarding Tables I and II


XMAX(L) and XMIN(L)
        On cards (8), page 6 above, quantities XMAX(L) may be read 
in, zeroes being replaced by 1010.  Quantities XMIN(L) are 
calculated by the code, and the parameters restricted during the 
least-squares-fitting iteration to the range

        XMIN(L).LE.X(L).LE.XMAX(L) .

The quantities XMAX are determined by

                  (  max[X(L), XMAX(L)],     XMAX(L).NE.0
        XMAX(L) = (
                  (  10**10 ,                XMAX(L) = 0

and the quantities XMIN by

                  (  max[10-6, X(L)-(XMAX(L)-X(L))],   LF(L) > -50
        XMIN(L) = (
                  (  -XMAX(L) ,                        LF(L) ś -50

These relations, plus changes in LF and in XMAX and XMIN when F 
reaches unity, are summarized in Table I.
        Alterations in LF before each type of least-squares 
calculation, and the effect of LF(L) on X(L), are summarized in 
Table II.  Values of LF(L) are printed out each cycle so that one 
can tell which LSQM is being used, which parameters are linked or 
held fixed, etc.
